{"label": "Introduction to Hubble", "image": "pictures/hubble1.webp", "text": "Exploring the wonders of the universe through the Hubble Space Telescope."}
{"label": "What is Hubble", "image": "pictures/hubble2.webp", "text": "The Hubble Space Telescope was launched on April 24, 1990, and now orbits about 340 miles (550 kilometers) above the Earth. It completes one orbit around our planet approximately every 95 minutes, allowing it to observe the cosmos without the distortions caused by Earth's atmosphere. \n Thanks to this vantage point, Hubble consistently outperforms many of the most advanced ground-based telescopes, capturing sharp images of distant objects like never before."}
{"label": "How Hubble works", "image": "pictures/hubble3.webp", "text": "To produce the color images you're about to see, the Hubble Space Telescope uses advanced electronic sensors called CCDs (Charge-Coupled Devices) to explore the universe. Unlike traditional cameras, these sensors capture images in various shades of black and white. The data is then processed, with different filters corresponding to specific wavelengths of light, and the images are colorized and combined to create the final, vibrant pictures. \nHowever, some colors are exaggerated or assigned false colors to represent wavelengths that are otherwise invisible to the human eye, such as infrared and ultraviolet light. This technique helps scientists uncover hidden details, like the chemical composition, temperature, and movement of distant celestial objects. \nFor example, the Crab Nebula (Messier 1), the remnants of a supernova explosion recorded by Chinese astronomers in 1054, has been imaged using this method. Hubble's colorized images reveal intricate filaments of ionized gas and an incredibly dense neutron star at its core, known as a pulsar, which spins 30 times per second. These enhanced colors help scientists study the nebula’s expansion and understand the life cycle of massive stars."}
{"label": "Hubble's achievements", "image": "pictures/hubble4.webp", "text": "Since its launch, the Hubble Space Telescope has made over 1.5 million incredible observations, capturing events ranging from the birth and death of stars to swirling galaxies billions of light-years away. Hubble’s images of planets in our own solar system are so detailed that only spacecraft that have physically visited these worlds, such as the Voyager, Cassini, or Perseverance missions, can surpass its clarity. \nBy gazing deep into space, Hubble has helped scientists unravel fundamental cosmic mysteries. One of its most groundbreaking contributions was helping to refine the estimated age of the universe. Before Hubble, estimates ranged wildly from 10 to 20 billion years. However, by observing Cepheid variable stars—which act as cosmic mile markers—Hubble provided a much more precise estimate of 13.8 billion years, confirming that our universe is nearly three times older than Earth itself. \nAnother of Hubble’s historic discoveries was dark energy, a mysterious force causing the universe’s expansion to accelerate. This unexpected finding, first observed through Hubble’s deep-space surveys, earned scientists the 2011 Nobel Prize in Physics."}
{"label": "Introduction to pictures", "image": "pictures/hubble5.webp", "text": "The Hubble Space Telescope is one of the most ambitious and influential astronomical projects in human history. Since its launch in 1990, it has revolutionized our understanding of the cosmos, taking some of the most breathtaking images of space ever seen and captivating the public like no other telescope before it. From the discovery of exoplanet atmospheres to the deepest glimpses into the early universe, Hubble’s contributions are unparalleled. \nWill it soon be overshadowed by the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST)? Perhaps in time. JWST, launched in December 2021, is designed to peer even farther into the past with its infrared vision, detecting the faintest galaxies formed just a few hundred million years after the Big Bang. However, Hubble and JWST are not rivals but partners, working together to provide a more complete picture of the universe across different wavelengths of light. \nFor now, Hubble remains one of the most successful tools for exploring the farthest reaches of space. It continues to operate flawlessly, with recent upgrades extending its mission well into the 2030s. Its images, such as the Ultra Deep Field, which reveals thousands of galaxies in a tiny patch of sky, or the detailed storms on Jupiter, continue to amaze and inform scientists and the public alike.\nSo sit back, relax, and prepare for an awe-inspiring journey through the cosmos as we explore some of the most extraordinary images ever captured by the Hubble Space Telescope."}
{"label": "Supernova 1994D", "image": "pictures/hubble6.webp", "text": "Supernova 1994D was a Type Ia supernova in the elliptical galaxy NGC 4526, located about 55 million light-years away in the Virgo Cluster. Discovered on March 5, 1994, by astronomers at the Palomar Observatory, it was quickly observed by the Hubble Space Telescope. Type Ia supernovae occur when a white dwarf star in a binary system accumulates matter from its companion until it explodes in a thermonuclear event. These supernovae are crucial for measuring cosmic distances due to their consistent brightness.\nHubble’s images of Supernova 1994D allowed detailed studies of the explosion’s aftermath. Observations of Type Ia supernovae like 1994D helped reveal the presence of dark energy, which is driving the acceleration of the universe's expansion. The light from this supernova traveled for about 55 million years, and its data also contributed to refining measurements of cosmic distances, aiding in our understanding of the universe's scale and age.\nThe explosion of supernovae like 1994D also plays a key role in stellar evolution, dispersing heavier elements into space that form new stars and planets."}
{"label": "The Majestic Sombrero Galaxy", "image": "pictures/hubble7.webp", "text": "The Sombrero Galaxy (also known as M104) is one of the most visually striking galaxies in the universe, located about 28 million light-years away in the Virgo Cluster. Its unique shape, resembling a wide-brimmed sombrero, comes from its bright central bulge and the thin, flat disk of stars, which is encircled by a prominent dust lane. This distinct appearance makes it one of the most photographed and recognizable galaxies in the sky. It’s visible in the Virgo constellation, and its location makes it easily observable with a small telescope.\nThe galaxy has an impressive diameter of about 50,000 light-years, making it slightly smaller than our own Milky Way. The Sombrero Galaxy is an unbarred spiral galaxy, meaning it does not have a large central bar structure like many spiral galaxies, such as the Milky Way. The central bulge is extremely dense and contains a high concentration of stars, some of which are older and redder.\nAt the heart of the Sombrero Galaxy lies a supermassive black hole, estimated to have a mass of about a billion times that of the Sun. The black hole plays a key role in the galaxy’s evolution and is thought to be responsible for the high-energy activity observed in the center. Some studies suggest that the active galactic nucleus (AGN) in M104 may have once been much more active, possibly expelling high-energy radiation in the past.\nOne of the most distinctive features of the Sombrero Galaxy is the dust lane that wraps around its disk. This dust lane, visible in both optical and infrared wavelengths, is composed of cool gas and dust that blocks the light from stars in the background. The dust not only shapes the galaxy’s characteristic sombrero-like appearance but also indicates that the galaxy may still be forming new stars from the gas in its disk, although this process is relatively slow compared to younger galaxies.\nThe Sombrero Galaxy has been a key object in studying the role of dark matter in galaxies. The galaxy's outer regions, where the visible stars are sparse, show a high velocity of rotation that suggests the presence of large amounts of unseen mass—this is believed to be dark matter, a mysterious substance that doesn't emit light but exerts gravitational forces on visible matter.\nIn addition to its structural features, the Sombrero Galaxy has provided insights into the evolution of galaxies, especially in the context of elliptical and spiral galaxies. While most spiral galaxies have a well-defined spiral structure, the Sombrero’s spiral arms are much more subtle and faint, possibly due to the older stellar population in the disk. It also offers valuable data about galactic interactions, as it may have formed from the merging of smaller galaxies.\nThe Hubble Space Telescope has captured some of the most detailed images of the Sombrero Galaxy, revealing not only its structure but also the fine details of its central bulge and dust lanes. These observations have been instrumental in enhancing our understanding of galaxy dynamics, star formation, and black hole activity."}
{"label": "Magnetic monster", "image": "pictures/hubble8.webp", "text": "NGC 1275, also known as Perseus A, is a supermassive galaxy located at the heart of the Perseus Cluster, about 230 million light-years from Earth. It is a highly unusual galaxy with some of the most intriguing features, earning it the nickname the Magnetic Monster due to its powerful magnetic fields and energetic phenomena. NGC 1275 is a radio galaxy and hosts an extremely active galactic nucleus (AGN) with a supermassive black hole at its center, making it one of the most studied galaxies in terms of both astrophysical activity and structure.\nNGC 1275 is classified as a giant elliptical galaxy, with a diameter of roughly 200,000 light-years, making it one of the larger galaxies in the Perseus Cluster. It has a dense core surrounded by a diffuse, elongated halo of stars. The galaxy’s appearance is marked by a central dust lane, which is quite unusual for an elliptical galaxy, and its dynamic interactions with its environment make it a key object of interest in the study of galaxy evolution and cluster dynamics.\nAt the core of NGC 1275 lies a supermassive black hole with an estimated mass of about 350 million times that of the Sun. This black hole is the source of intense radiation and particle jets, which are emitted as the black hole consumes matter. These high-energy jets of particles extend far beyond the galaxy itself, often interacting with the surrounding hot gas in the Perseus Cluster, which causes the formation of intricate structures known as radio lobes. These lobes can be seen in radio wavelengths and are a key feature of radio galaxies like NGC 1275.\nThe galaxy is also famous for its magnetic fields, which are extremely powerful and play a crucial role in the galaxy's energetic processes. The central black hole generates these magnetic fields through its activity, which influences the movement of charged particles and the surrounding gas. This interaction is part of what makes NGC 1275 a “magnetic monster,” as these fields extend well beyond the galaxy and affect the cluster environment. The strong magnetic fields in NGC 1275 can trap and accelerate electrons to nearly the speed of light, creating bright emissions detectable in the radio, X-ray, and optical spectra.\nNGC 1275 has a very interesting relationship with the intracluster medium (ICM), the hot, diffuse gas that fills the space between galaxies in a galaxy cluster. The black hole’s powerful outflows and jets inject energy into the ICM, which prevents the gas from cooling and collapsing into new stars. This process, known as feedback, is essential for maintaining the overall structure of the cluster and preventing excessive star formation. In essence, the galaxy is playing a pivotal role in regulating the growth of new stars in its cluster environment.\nHubble Space Telescope observations of NGC 1275 have provided invaluable insights into the interactions between the central black hole and the surrounding gas. The images show the central dust lane, along with the high-energy jets and radio lobes extending outward, and the intricate structures formed by the black hole’s outflows. These observations are crucial for understanding the behavior of AGNs and their impact on galaxy clusters.\nInterestingly, NGC 1275’s interaction with its environment is also linked to a phenomenon known as cooling flow, where gas from the cluster falls into the galaxy and cools, potentially feeding the central black hole. This cooling process creates complex patterns of hot and cold gas, leading to shocks and turbulence in the intracluster medium, which in turn affects the dynamics of the entire cluster."}
{"label": "The pillars of creation", "image": "pictures/hubble10.webp", "text": "The Pillars of Creation is one of the most iconic and awe-inspiring images taken by the Hubble Space Telescope, showcasing massive structures of gas and dust located in the Eagle Nebula (M16), about 6,500 to 7,000 light-years away from Earth. These towering columns, visible in the image captured by Hubble in 1995, are areas of intense star formation, where new stars are being born from the surrounding interstellar material. The pillars themselves are composed of cold gas and dust, and they serve as the cradles of stars, providing the raw material for stellar creation.\nEach pillar is roughly 4,000 to 5,000 light-years tall and is shaped like giant columns or spires, with the tips of these pillars being the most active regions where new stars are forming. The dark, dense regions at the center of these pillars are thought to be sites where protostars — the earliest stages of stars — are emerging. These protostars are still embedded within the dense gas, and as they form, their intense radiation and stellar winds blow away the surrounding gas, revealing the bright, young stars at their cores.\nThe Pillars of Creation have become famous not only for their beauty but also for what they reveal about the process of star formation. The gas within these pillars is primarily composed of hydrogen, and as it collapses under its own gravity, it begins to heat up, eventually triggering nuclear fusion in the heart of the newly formed stars. The surrounding gas is illuminated by the energy emitted from these young stars, making the pillars glow in stunning colors when viewed in infrared and optical light. In infrared images, much of the dust is transparent, revealing even more details about the region's star-forming activity.\nOne of the fascinating aspects of the Pillars of Creation is that they are being eroded by the intense radiation from the stars that they are giving birth to. The radiation and stellar winds push away the surrounding gas and dust, gradually causing the pillars to shrink and break apart. Over time, this process will eventually destroy the pillars, but new stars will continue to form in the surrounding gas.\nThe Pillars of Creation also provide important insights into the life cycle of molecular clouds, which are dense regions of gas and dust that act as the birthplaces of stars. By studying these structures, astronomers can learn more about how stars are born and how the material in these clouds is recycled into new generations of stars and planets.\nThe Hubble images of the Pillars of Creation also demonstrate the power of modern space telescopes. Hubble’s detailed observations have allowed scientists to study the fine structure of the gas and dust in the pillars, as well as the stars that are emerging from within. The telescope’s ability to capture light across multiple wavelengths, from ultraviolet to visible and infrared, has provided an unprecedented view of this incredible star-forming region.\nInterestingly, Hubble’s iconic image of the Pillars of Creation was taken over 20 years ago, and the region itself is much older than the telescope's observations. The image we see today actually shows the state of the pillars as it appeared around 6,500 to 7,000 years ago, and the structures may have changed significantly since then, as they continue to evolve under the forces of star formation and stellar winds.\nIn addition to their scientific importance, the Pillars of Creation have captured the public’s imagination, symbolizing the ongoing cycle of creation and destruction in the universe. The image remains one of the most famous and widely recognized space photographs ever taken."}
{"label": "Veil nebula supernova remnant", "image": "pictures/hubble11.webp", "text": "The Veil Nebula is a spectacular supernova remnant located in the constellation Cygnus, about 1,500 light-years from Earth. It is the remnant of a massive star that exploded in a supernova approximately 10,000 to 20,000 years ago. The Veil Nebula is composed of the expanding debris from this explosion, consisting of ionized gas and dust that was ejected when the star's core collapsed and triggered the supernova. The nebula is often referred to as a fossil of this stellar explosion.\nThe Veil Nebula is an immense and beautiful structure that spans more than 50 light-years across, and it is composed of several distinct regions, including the Eastern Veil, the Western Veil, and the Bright Knot. The nebula is characterized by its delicate, filigree-like appearance, with long, wispy filaments of gas and dust. These filaments are the remnants of the explosion’s shockwaves, where the high-energy radiation from the supernova has ionized and heated the surrounding gas.\nOne of the most interesting aspects of the Veil Nebula is the shockwave produced by the supernova explosion. The shockwave from the explosion accelerated particles to nearly the speed of light, creating a region of high-energy emissions, including X-rays and radio waves, that can be detected by telescopes. These emissions are particularly prominent in the Eastern Veil and Western Veil, where the shockwaves have interacted with the surrounding interstellar medium, producing bright, glowing filaments. The nebula is also a source of H-alpha emissions, a characteristic red glow produced by hydrogen gas being ionized by the high-energy radiation.\nThe central part of the Veil Nebula contains a highly dense region called the Pickering's Triangle, which is a remnant of the supernova shockfront. This region is particularly notable for its intricate structure and for being an area where the gas is still being excited by the remnants of the explosion.\nAt the heart of the Veil Nebula lies a pulsar, the remnant of the core of the star that exploded. This pulsar is a rapidly rotating neutron star, which emits beams of electromagnetic radiation as it spins. The pulsar is responsible for some of the nebula’s energetic emissions and continues to interact with the surrounding gas and dust. The magnetic field of the pulsar is incredibly strong, and its rotation causes a significant amount of high-energy particles to be accelerated, contributing to the nebula’s emission of X-rays.\nThe Hubble Space Telescope and Chandra X-ray Observatory have provided breathtaking images and data on the Veil Nebula. Hubble’s observations in visible light show the fine detail of the filaments and the complex structures within the nebula, while Chandra has captured high-energy X-ray images that reveal the interaction between the pulsar and the surrounding gas. The nebula’s intricate structure, visible in different wavelengths of light, is a testament to the powerful forces at play in the aftermath of a supernova.\nThe Veil Nebula also plays an important role in the study of supernova remnants and the processes involved in the death of massive stars. The remnants of the explosion enrich the surrounding interstellar medium with heavier elements like oxygen, carbon, and iron, which will later be incorporated into new stars and planets. This ongoing cycle of stellar birth and death is a key part of the cosmic recycling process, helping to shape the future of the galaxy.\nDespite its beauty, the Veil Nebula is also a dynamic and destructive environment, with intense radiation and fast-moving shockwaves that could potentially pose a danger to nearby life, though the nebula is located far enough from Earth to have no direct impact. It is a stunning reminder of the immense forces and cosmic events that shape the universe."}
{"label": "Globular cluster NGC1805", "image": "pictures/hubble12.webp", "text": "NGC 1805 is a fascinating globular cluster located in the constellation Tucana, approximately 160,000 light-years away from Earth, within the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC). The LMC is a satellite galaxy of the Milky Way, and NGC 1805 is one of the most prominent and studied globular clusters within it. The cluster is particularly notable for its rich population of stars and its age, which helps astronomers understand the evolution of stars in different environments.\nGlobular clusters like NGC 1805 are dense collections of hundreds of thousands to millions of stars, tightly bound together by gravity. These clusters are often considered some of the oldest objects in the universe, and studying them can provide important insights into the early stages of star formation and the evolution of galaxies.\nOne of the remarkable features of NGC 1805 is its relatively young age compared to other globular clusters. Most globular clusters are thought to be more than 10 billion years old, but NGC 1805 is estimated to be only around 1.5 to 2 billion years old. This makes it much younger than typical globular clusters, and its stars are not as old or as evolved as those in older clusters. Despite its youth, NGC 1805 still exhibits characteristics that are similar to older globular clusters, such as a high concentration of stars near its center and a dense, spherical shape.\nThe cluster is home to a large population of massive stars, some of which are in the red supergiant and blue supergiant stages of their life cycles. These massive stars are in the process of exhausting their nuclear fuel and will eventually end their lives in supernova explosions, enriching the surrounding interstellar medium with heavy elements. The presence of hot, young stars in NGC 1805 indicates that the cluster is still actively undergoing star formation, albeit at a slower rate than it did in the past.\nInterestingly, NGC 1805 is also known for its abundance of binary stars, which are pairs of stars that are gravitationally bound and orbit one another. These binary systems are of great interest to astronomers because they provide valuable information about the masses, sizes, and evolutionary stages of stars. The study of these binary systems can help scientists understand how stars interact with one another and how they evolve over time.\nOne of the most striking features of NGC 1805 is its central concentration of stars, which is characteristic of globular clusters. The stars in the center of the cluster are packed very closely together, making it a dense environment with high gravitational forces. This central concentration is a result of the cluster's formation process, where stars were originally created in a relatively small region and gradually drifted toward the center due to the influence of gravity.\nNGC 1805 also contains a population of variable stars, including Cepheid variables, which are stars that periodically change in brightness. These stars are important for astronomers because their pulsation periods are directly related to their intrinsic luminosity, which allows scientists to measure distances in space with great accuracy. The study of variable stars in NGC 1805 has helped astronomers improve our understanding of stellar evolution and distance measurement techniques.\nThe cluster's stars are also rich in heavy elements like iron, which is a key indicator of the chemical composition of the universe at the time of its formation. By studying the abundance of these elements, astronomers can learn about the processes that took place in the early universe, including the formation of galaxies and stars.\nHubble Space Telescope images of NGC 1805 have provided breathtaking views of its stars and structure. The telescope's high-resolution imaging capabilities have allowed scientists to study the detailed arrangement of stars in the cluster and to identify individual stars, binary systems, and other features within it. These images have also helped scientists refine models of how globular clusters form and evolve over time.\nIn addition to its scientific significance, NGC 1805 is also a beautiful and visually striking object. The cluster is located in the southern sky and can be observed through telescopes, making it a popular target for amateur astronomers. Its dense concentration of stars and its relatively young age make it a unique and valuable object for studying the evolution of stars and the formation of galaxies."}
{"label": "Outro", "image": "pictures/hubble13.webp", "text": "Since its launch on April 24, 1990, aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery (STS-31), the Hubble Space Telescope has revolutionized our understanding of the universe. Over the past three decades, the telescope has gathered an immense amount of data, contributing to over 18,000 peer-reviewed scientific papers that have reshaped fields ranging from planet formation to the behavior of supermassive black holes.\nBeyond its scientific contributions, Hubble's breathtaking images have rekindled global interest in astronomy. Thanks to its position above Earth's atmosphere, where it avoids atmospheric distortion, Hubble has provided an unparalleled view of the cosmos, capturing iconic images that are now accessible to anyone with an internet connection. This ability to bring the universe closer to the public has made Hubble one of the most celebrated telescopes in history.\nNot since Galileo Galilei first turned his telescope to the heavens in 1609 has an instrument so profoundly changed our perception of space. Like Galileo’s observations of Jupiter’s moons and Saturn’s rings, Hubble’s discoveries—such as the accelerating expansion of the universe and the atmospheric compositions of exoplanets—have shifted our perspective on our place in the cosmos.\nHubble remains our window into the unknown, continuously pushing the boundaries of discovery while paving the way for next-generation observatories like the James Webb Space Telescope. Even after more than three decades in orbit, its legacy continues to inspire both scientists and dreamers alike."}